---
title: "Paper Review"
date: 2019-01-28
tags: []
header: 
    image: "/images/waterfront.jpg"
excerpt: "Gene Expression"
mathjax: "true"
---
## Title: Dynamics of ribosome scanning and recycling revealed by translation complex profiling
- Authors: Stuart K. Archer, Nikolay E. Shirokikh, Traude H. Beilharz4, Thomas Preiss
- Journal: Nature
- Year: 2016


This group in EMBL-Australia have developed a variant of ribosome profiling termed 'translation complex profiling sequence' (TCP-seq) which can record positions of not only the 80S ribosome but also the small subunit (SSU). The basic idea is using formaldehyde to induce covalent cross-links between nucleotides and translation complexes, followed by RNase treatment and the separation of SSU and 80S crosslinked intermediates. Then, each type of complexes is separately deep-sequenced, giving you the distribution profile for ribosomes not only the elongation phase but the initiation and termination phases as well. They have published their protocol in another paper, see here, and their TCP-seq data for yeast is available on this public website here.


Here is this paper they have applied this method to analyze the scanning mechanism in yeast cells. Their observation support a model termed cap-severed scanning (as opposed to cap-tethered scanning) where the SSU leave 5’ end region the same as other regions of 5’ UTR. And they also detect simultaneous scanning of multiple SSU from 5’ UTR. They also observed changes in SSU footprint size at the start and stop codons supporting their model for structural rearrangements of translation complex at these spots. Please see the text for more of their results.



Though the experimental procedure is highly complex, it provides a great approach to get insight into all three phase of translation. The development of this method to other cell types, especially mammalian cells could provide invaluable insight into translation control as mammalian cells mostly have larger 5’UTR than yeast.

## Title: Deciphering mRNA Sequence Determinants of Protein Production Rate
- Author: Juraj Szavits-Nossan, Luca Ciandrini, and M. Carmen Romano
- Journal: Physical Review Letter
- Year: 2018 

Here is a short but interesting paper about modelling translation elongation by a well-known approach termed totally asymmetric exclusion process (TASEP) to predict the produced protein flux (or rate). People use the TASEP-based approaches to model non-equilibrium many-body systems. It does have wide applications, like in modelling traffic jam, motor proteins movement, protein synthesis or wherever there is a queue of randomly moving particles like ribosomes.  The interesting thing about this paper is that they have integrated the sequence properties into their model and by developing an analytical method they have determined the effect of sequences on protein rate. They have analytically found that the first 10 codons of the RNA and the translation initiation rate are the main determinants of protein production rate.  They have also estimated the elongation rate for all 61 codons, stop codons are kept out (see sup. table 1). The model system they used to compare their results with was S. cerevisiae cells.

## Title: Determining the Limitations and Benefits of Noise in Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction through Single Cell, Microscopy-Based Analysis
- Author: Marie D. Harton and Eric Batchelor
- Journal: Journal of Molecular Biology
- Year: 2017

This is a brief review of work on the effect of noise on regulatory networks, focusing particularly on recent microscopy-based single-cell studies. It starts by discussing how single-cell methods have enabled us to characterize features of noisy gene expression. Then authors discuss the effect of noise on the coordination of gene expression, the channel capacity of signal transduction networks and dynamic signal processing. 

To characterize noise in gene expression, the authors first briefly describe two components of noise, intrinsic and extrinsic noises, and then discuss how fluorescent microscopy-based methods (especially smRNA FISH) have helped us to determine the contribution of these noises on variation in cell population and understand the effect of these noises on gene expression and regulation. One important phenomenon identified by these methods is transcription bursting which is a source of noise in gene expression in a variety of organisms. The methods based on smRNA FISH is highlighted by the authors as used in so many studies. For example, using this method, it has been found that the DNA supercoiling is a physical cause of bursting in E coli and also gene expression noise is a tuneable property. The authors also discuss the effect of noise on multi-protein complex formation, correlation of mRNA and protein levels, and the difference on abundances of cytoplasmic and nuclear RNA transcripts (the first one is minimally stochastic) and the strong correlation of mRNA abundance with cell size. 

The authors then discuss how noise can improve cellular regulation. The impact of noise on the coordination of target genes was discussed by mentioning a couple of recent studies. One case considered here is how yeast can co-regulate a set of target genes in response to calcium level using the stochastic nuclear-localization dynamics of a single transcription factor Crz1. This system is based on frequency-modulation regulation (see the paper) in which the Crz1 localizes to the nucleus in stochastic bursts which is affected by calcium level. Further examples are given in the text. The studies in these works have mostly used time-lapse fluorescence microscopy.     

The authors then go over the role of noise in signal transduction pathways. Here they discuss the channel capacity (for a clear definition, see the paper) of a few biological systems including the quorum-sensing systems in the Vibrio harvey and the tumour necrosis factor (TNF). The challenge here is to reduce noise in signalling pathways. The authors point out a few mechanisms including negative feedback, the integration of information from several pathways (a topic in information theory), temporal dynamics (explored by fluorescence microscopy approaches). Still, it needs more work to identify additional mechanisms to reduce the effect of noise. There is also a short section discussing how noise can improve detection of weak signals in oscillatory systems. one of the examples discussed here is the impact of noise and oscillations on NF-kB signalling network.  

The authors at the end point out that the sources and effect of noise in biological systems still need much more work to be fully understood and emphasize the need for developing advanced fluorescence microscopy methods.


